DIP-225/DIP-227 Graph and User Data Operations (#233)
LibertyDSNP/spec: pages/DSNP/Graph.md

This specification describes the social network graph and how it is represented in the protocol.

In this context a [social graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_graph) means a graph that represents social relationships between entities.

## Nodes

Users are represented in the DSNP graph by nodes uniquely identified by their [DSNP User Ids](Identifiers.md#dsnp-user-id).
Relationships between users are the graph edges.

## Edges

Graph edges that originate from a user are stored as DSNP [User Data](UserData.md) associated with a given user.

Each graph edge consists of the following data:

> * DSNP User Id (64-bit unsigned integer)

Reviewer: The signed/unsigned is strange here. It feels odd to have a uint64 everywhere but here.

Author: This is a compromise driven by the lack of a native unsigned type in Avro. The alternative would be to store as a fixed 8-byte value. This is better aligned with actual User Ids, but doesn't allow the Avro serialization to do any integer packing, which pushes responsibility to the compression codec, which has less context to work with.

Comparison of 300 GraphEdge entries using evenly distributed User Ids from 0 to 300,000,000:
| User Id data type | Avro binary serialization size (bytes) | Size after applying Brotli compression (bytes) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `long` | 2,247 | 2,167 |
| `fixed` | 3,900 | 2,841 |

`fixed` is consistently about 30% larger after compression.

  * To allow for optimal compression, User Ids are stored using the `long` type in Avro schema, which is a 64-bit _signed_ integer.
    Care should be taken to ensure that User Id values greater than or equal to 2<sup>63</sup>, where used by an implementation, are converted correctly between signed and unsigned representations.

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Author: My opinion is that it's useful to have, if only for the user themself to be able to track ("we've been friends since high school") or the app to use for curation ("happy friendiversary") etc. It also provides a useful way to give an ordering to the data that is a forcing function to put new relationships at the end, hopefully allowing for better transaction optimization.

As for granularity, I don't really see much actual use for more than a date, in which case 16 bits would be enough. If you add multiple friends on the same day, though, it does introduce some ambiguity from a consistent ordering perspective (you'd want to sort on date and then userId).

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Author: A couple of further notes on this:
* Avro doesn't have a 16-byte primitive type, so we would have to define serialization to `fixed(2)`.
* For reference, the millisecond-based approach with an Avro `long` will ZigZag encode to 48 bits for the foreseeable future, so it's not as bad as the full 64 (but still a lot more than 16!)

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Reviewer: I'm on the side of seconds over milliseconds for data that usually goes on-chain.

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Reviewer: Re: `long` Our announcements have a Parquet data type. Do we also want to have an avro type in there?

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Author: Agreed, changing to seconds.

Re: Parquet vs. Avro, can you clarify what you mean? I think Parquet is great for batches because you get native Bloom Filter support, self-contained schema metadata, and a columnar format that makes it easier to search. Those exact reasons make it a terrible choice for on-chain (or near-chain) data. As much as I'd rather support a single standard, the use cases suggest otherwise. If you mean we should optimize Parquet storage of INT64 types, it looks like that can be done with [DELTA_BINARY_PACKED = 5](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/data-pages/encodings/#a-namedeltaencadelta-encoding-delta_binary_packed--5). But if I'm misunderstanding the question let me know.

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Reviewer: I'm just thinking of adding the additional data type to the table data for each announcement. Aka instead of assuming that everything is parquet as it sort of does now, we are clearer in each Announcement spec how it should be represented in Avro data as well.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1252199/219405822-90deb834-02a8-4a40-9628-69f3d59c0b5a.png)

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Author: OK I see what you mean. Let's break that out to a separate issue for discussion.

> * Timestamp when relationship was created (64-bit milliseconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time))

Author: See https://github.com/LibertyDSNP/spec/issues/235

    "name": "GraphEdge",
    "type": "record",
    "doc": "A relationship to another DSNP user",
    "fields": [
        {
            "name": "userId",
            "type": "long",
            "doc": "DSNP User Id of object of relationship"
        },
        {
            "name": "since",
            "type": "long",
            "doc": "Time when this relationship was originally established"
        }
    ]
}
```

## User Data Sets

DSNP user data structures capture three distinct sets of relationships, as described below.

### Public Follows

Each public follow records a unidirectional relationship where one user (the controller of the graph) is interested in following the public speech of another user.
When follows are public, they are visible to any other user or system, including the user being followed.

The `publicFollows` user data type is composed of a set of GraphEdge objects.

### Private Follows

A private follow also records an interest in following the public speech of another user, but the data is stored in encrypted form, meaning the relationship is not visible to the followed user, or any other user, without access to the decryption key.

> The `privateFollows` user data type is composed of a set of GraphEdge objects.

Author: It's a compressed and encrypted set of GraphEdge objects. If that wasn't clear from context I'm happy to make it more explicit.

An encrypted data set controlled by a DSNP user records which users they recognize as connections.
A second, public, data set enables users to signal their connection to one another via Pseudonymous Relationship Identifiers.

The `privateConnections` user data type is composed of a set of GraphEdge objects, which is then compressed and encrypted.
The `privateConnectionPRIds` user data type is composed of a set of PRId objects as defined below, without compression or encryption.

### Pseudonymous Relationship Identifiers

Private connections are complemented by publishing private connection Pseudonymous Relationship Identifiers (PRIds), which provide a means of making the connection relationship visible to the other user while maintaining privacy with respect to any third parties.
Applications are encouraged to verify connection relationships by checking to see that they are reciprocated, with the appropriate identifier present in both users' data.

PRId objects MUST comply with the following [Avro](https://avro.apache.org) schema:

```
{
    "namespace": "org.dsnp.userdata",
    "name": "PRId",
    "type": "fixed",

>     "size": 16,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "size": 8,
```

1. Both Alice and Bob generate an asymmetric key pair, and each publishes a Public Key Announcement with their generated public key and a `keyType` value of `keyAgreement`.
1. When Alice wants to interact with Bob, she looks up Bob's public key and performs a key exchange operation using her private key and Bob's public key, generating a shared secret `k` as in the libsodium function <code>crypto_box_beforenm(k, Bob<sub>public</sub>, Alice<sub>private</sub>)</code>.
1. Alice derives a context-specific subkey <code>k<sub>PRId</sub></code>, using the shared secret `k` as the master key, as in the libsodium function `crypto_kdf_derive_from_key`, using `0` (zero) as the key identifier (see the [PRId Context](#contexts) table below) and the ASCII encoding of `"DSNPPRId"` as the 8-byte human-readable identifier.
1. Alice concatenates her DSNP User Id and Bob's DSNP User Id to form a 16-byte message.

> 1. Alice encrypts the message using the PRId key <code>k<sub>PRId</sub></code> and a nonce of all zeros, as in the libsodium function `crypto_secret_box_easy`.

Author: Yes. And good point, the same nonce shouldn't be reused with the same key. I need to change it so that the derived key is specific to the relationship target... I forgot about Bob using the same key/nonce. If the derived keys are different, a fixed nonce is OK because the key is only ever used for this one encryption.

> 1. Alice encrypts the message using the PRId key <code>k<sub>Bob</sub></code> and a nonce of the [PRId Context](#contexts) (all zeros for connections), as in the libsodium function `crypto_secret_box_easy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Alice encrypts the message using the PRId key <code>k<sub>Bob</sub></code> and a nonce of the [PRId Context](#contexts) (all zeros for connections), as in the libsodium function `crypto_secretbox_easy`.
```

In this context a [social graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_graph) means a graph that represents social relationships between entities.

## Nodes

Users are represented in the DSNP graph by nodes uniquely identified by their [DSNP User Ids](Identifiers.md#dsnp-user-id).
Relationships between users are the graph edges.

## Edges

Graph edges that originate from a user are stored as DSNP [User Data](UserData.md) associated with a given user.

Each graph edge consists of the following data:
* DSNP User Id (64-bit unsigned integer)
  * <mark>To allow for optimal compression, User Ids are stored using the <tt>long</tt> type in Avro schema, which is a 64-bit _signed_ integer.
    Care should be taken to ensure that User Id values greater than or equal to 2<sup>63</sup>, where used by an implementation, are converted correctly between signed and unsigned representations.</mark>
* Timestamp when relationship was created, in seconds since the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time)

GraphEdge objects MUST conform to the following [Avro](https://avro.apache.org) schema:

```
{
    "namespace": "org.dsnp.userdata",

>     "name": "GraphEdge",

Reviewer: Let's try a separate page just for Avro schemas and see if it works.

    "type": "record",
    "doc": "A relationship to another DSNP user",
    "fields": [
        {
            "name": "userId",
            "type": "long",

>             "doc": "DSNP User Id of object of relationship"

Reviewer 2: How about "the other user's DSNP Id", since that is sort of what the "doc" field says?

        },
        {
            "name": "since",
            "type": "long",
            "doc": "Timestamp in Unix epoch seconds when this relationship was originally established"
        }
    ]
}
```

## User Data Sets

> 

Reviewer: Instead of mentioning data type information here, should that just move over to `UserData.md` and reference a "See [User Data] for details"?

DSNP user data structures capture three distinct sets of relationships, as described below.

### Public Follows

Each public follow records a unidirectional relationship where one user (the controller of the graph) is interested in following the public speech of another user.
When follows are public, they are visible to any other user or system, including the user being followed.

> The `publicFollows` user data type is composed of a set of GraphEdge objects, which is then compressed.

Reviewer: Lines like this one feel out of place without additional details here, but those details are over on UserData

Reviewer 2: could always link to "GraphEdge"

Reviewer: Link to the "User Data Types" table

### Private Follows

> A private follow also records an interest in following the public speech of another user, but the data is stored in encrypted form, meaning the relationship is not visible to the followed user, or any other user, without access to the decryption key.

Reviewer: Simplification of English suggestion:
```suggestion
A private follow records an interest in following the public speech of another user, but the data is stored in encrypted form.
The relationship is not visible to the followed user or any other user, without access to the decryption key.
```

The `privateFollows` user data type is composed of a set of GraphEdge objects, which is then compressed and encrypted.

### Private Connections

> Private connections represent one half of a bidirectional relationship between two DSNP Users.

Reviewer: Do we need to talk at all about why we spit the representation?

> An encrypted data set controlled by a DSNP user records which users they recognize as connections.
> A second, public, data set enables users to signal their connection to one another via Pseudonymous Relationship Identifiers.

Reviewer: The mention here of "second" feels like it references the statement about "half" above it.

Perhaps a rewording like this?:

```suggestion
Private connections are stored in on both sides of the bidirectional relationship between two DSNP Users.
Each user can then update the status of the relationship without loss of privacy.
Each DSNP user maintains and controls two sets of data:
1. An encrypted data set that records which users are recognized as connections.
2. A public data set that is to signal connection status via Pseudonymous Relationship Identifiers.
```

* Bob can prove to a third party that a given PRId in Alice's published connections is his, without allowing the third party to discover Alice or Bob's relationships with any other user.

#### Contexts

The following context values are currently defined for PRIds. All other values are reserved for future use.

| Context Id | Description | Context string |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | Connection | `PRIdCtx0` |

The following section describes how these values are used in the PRId generation process.

#### Algorithm

In the following section, the Alice to Bob identifier for context C is called PRId<sub>A→B,C</sub>, and the corresponding Bob to Alice identifier is called PRId<sub>B→A,C</sub>.

A PRId is derived from Alice and Bob's `keyAgreement` key pairs, using a key exchange protocol as follows. To illustrate the cryptographic operations required, the relevant functions from [libsodium](https://libsodium.org) are noted. Sodium is a stable, fast, free, and cross-platform cryptography library, and supports all encryption algorithms used in the DSNP specification out of the box.

> 1. Both Alice and Bob generate an asymmetric key pair, and each publishes a Public Key Announcement with their generated X25519 public key and a `keyType` value of `keyAgreement`.

Reviewer: @shannonwells to try to sketch something out for this

Similarly, Bob can calculate the same shared secret `k` using <code>Alice<sub>public</sub></code> and <code>Bob<sub>private</sub></code>, derive the PRId subkey for his own DSNP User Id, and then calculate the Alice-to-Bob PRId in order to check if it is in Alice's published PRIds.
Bob can also derive the PRId subkey for Alice's DSNP User Id and encrypt Alice's User Id, using his own as the nonce, to generate the Bob-to-Alice PRId, and then publish it to his own list, if desired.

If Alice or Bob wants to prove to a third party that their PRIds are in each other's `privateConnectionPRIds` list, they can provide the third party with their own subkey <code>k<sub>Alice</sub></code> or <code>k<sub>Bob</sub></code>. The third party can repeat the encryption step using Alice and Bob's User Ids, and check that the output is present in the published set of PRIds. The shared secret `k` (used as a master key in this algorithm) should _not_ be divulged.

In more formal terms:
* <code>PRId<sub>A→B,C</sub></code> = <code>XSalsa20(HKDF(SharedSecret<sub>AB</sub>, _DSNP User Id of B_, "PRIdCtx<i>C</i>"), _DSNP User Id of B_, _DSNP User Id of A_)</code>

> * <code>PRId<sub>B→A,C</sub></code> = <code>XSalsa20(HKDF(SharedSecret<sub>AB</sub>),_DSNP User Id of A_, "PRIdCtx<i>C</i>"), _DSNP User Id of A_, _DSNP User Id of B_)</code>

Reviewer: @aramikm See if this makes it more clear: https://github.com/LibertyDSNP/spec/pull/238
